Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in this
very interesting and important lecture
i'm going to introduce first of all a modern
variant of a very classical and famous result
the formula brahmagupta for the area of a cyclic
quadrilateral we're going to combine brahmagupta's
formula with a much more recent formula
due to robin's discovered around 1994
and we're going to combine these two but
reformulate the whole framework in a rational way
so this is evidence that by thinking rationally
and logically about basic fundamental geometrical
things we can actually discover new ways of
formulating all theorems and also generalizing
them making them more beautiful and more powerful
you're going to see that in today's video
the implications of this are actually quite
dramatic it suggests that there's actually a
revolution ahead of us here in pure mathematics in
the coming century where we start to rethink what
rigor means what it means to be actually precise
and clear and careful about the foundational
development of mathematics once we take that
more seriously which is what i'm urging us to do
then the possibility of revitalizing and
revisiting a lot of theorems comes into focus
necessarily we are going to be faced with
the perhaps unsettling idea that a lot of
the theorems that are out there are really
just theorems and not theorems in other words
if you examine them carefully the fact that they
are pinned onto a real number kind of setup means
that they're logically flawed and they will have
to be revisited and rebuilt using a more rational
framework if possible okay so there's lots of
opportunities that are going to be opening up for
researchers for developers for people who want to
think more clearly and carefully about mathematics
really the possibility of a lot of interesting
development and a lot of you can take part in this
so over this next coming part of the series
we're going to see more and more examples
of opportunities for you to get in there and
to start really making interesting discoveries
okay so famous formula brahmagupta which motivates
this discussion today is uh concerned with this
kind of situation where we have a
cyclic quadrilateral so a1a2a3a4
and with lengths of sides let's say a b c and
d now this happens to be a convex quadrilateral
which informally means that if we choose any
two points inside the quadrilateral then the
line segment joining them is also inside that's
actually a kind of a problematic definition so
i just want to think about that informally right
now to say that precisely and logically correctly
is actually quite subtle because we don't want to
depend on having to check an infinite number of
possibilities the way i just said it involves
infinite number of possibilities for any two
points you have to check that the entire line
segment's inside okay so we're going to leave
the actual definition of convex and non-convex for
another time it will turn out that the formulation
that i'm going to give you today which is going to
be called the cyclic quadrilateral quadra theorem
doesn't in fact require us to be
precise about what convex of non-convex
means that will be one of its significant
advantages over this classical formulation
all right so here's brahmagupta's formula perhaps
in a somewhat novel way where we write the quadra
which is 16 times the square of the area as
a product of these four factors each of them
created by taking sums or differences with these
four lengths a b c and d and then robin's formula
okay remarkable modern discovery that there was
a similar kind of formula for the quadra of a
non-convex quadrilateral something like this
also involving the four side lengths a b c and d
but now the combinations are a little bit
different we have a plus b plus c plus d
and then three of them uh with a pair
of minus signs in different places
all right so we have to admit however that
precisely speaking both of these results are
logically flawed in the sense that they require an
understanding of length or distance in the plane
setting up length and distance is problematic
which is why euclid avoided this issue in the
plane to define a distance requires a square root
and to create a theory of square roots
we need a prior theory of real numbers
involved in the idea of a square root is
actually an infinite process that never
ends so it's really logically very dubious even
though practically speaking if we're happy to
truncate this process after a certain number
of steps it can be very useful but as a concept
of pure mathematics it is flawed and so these
formulas are also necessarily logically flawed
it's important for us to be willing to
say that to be willing to acknowledge
that there is a difficulty even though these are
classical and admittedly very beautiful results
we are still allowed to say but wait a minute
there is a problem there is a problem because of
the underlying assumptions that we have a real
number system in which this is all happening
the reality is we don't have a real number system
in which it's all happening all right so we are
going to have to try to find a way of recasting
these results in a purely logical rational way
okay independent of any prior understanding of
real numbers and we are going to be able to do
that but before i do that i want to have a look at
these two results with the idea of exhibiting some
examples of illustrating what's going on here with
some concrete explicit examples which will bring
to you much clearer the the logical problems which
are actually underlying these two formulations now
it's a consequence of the logical difficulties
that pure mathematics is in that finding explicit
and concrete examples for many theoretical
situations is often a difficult task for students
we have lots of fancy theories but when
you look for concrete examples where
these theories are brought down to earth and
exhibited completely so that everybody can look
and see what's going on it can be very challenging
part of the reason is because if we did look at
concrete examples we would see more clearly the
logical difficulties and i want to illustrate
that by looking at some examples relating to
the brahmagupta's formulas and robbins formulas
okay so what would it look
like if we try to exhibit
the brahmagupta's formula in the context of a
real number so let's play along with the usual
real numbers story for just a little while and
illustrate this theorem well let's choose a simple
circle the unit circle equation x squared plus y
squared equals one and here it is in the x y plane
we want a cyclic quadrilateral
so let's choose four points
okay one point that's easy is the
point one zero let's call that a one
there it is there and now we want to choose some
other points but we want them not to be all just
easy points we want them to be a little bit more
general so how do we get points on the unit circle
well the standard story is that we use the
cosine sine parameterization most undergraduates
have been trained to automatically say that a
general point on the unit circle is of the form
cos theta sine theta it's a kind of automatic
reflex reaction all right so let's do that
so if we want a point let's say a2 one way of
obtaining it is to choose some value of theta
what could be simpler than say theta equals
one so here is the point cosine one sine one
well we have to look that up with our calculator
and it's approximately point five four zero
three point eight four one zero seven i've set my
calculator by the way here to five decimal places
so that's the precision level that it's giving me
all right there it is there let's remark that
this point is not precisely on the circle
because these are not the exact values
of these transcendental functions
there's actually infinite power series
that are defining these functions
and we're necessarily chopping off these
infinite processes to calculate these
transcendental numbers so already here we're
introducing certainly some approximation this
point that i've written down here is not exactly
on the circle although it's reasonably close
okay we need some more points how about cosine
three sine three let's call that the point a3
and there's its values approximately to five
decimal places and how about a4 over here
which is cosine of six sine of six i remind
you that all the way around is two pi
radians two pi is six point two something or
other and here's the values approximately of a4
okay so what do we need to do to exhibit
brahmagupta's formula we need to calculate
the side lengths of this quadrilateral a1 a2
a3 a4 and they are so here's d12 it's 0.95885
approximately up to 5 decimal places d23
1.6829 and d34 is 1.9950 and d14 is 0.28224
and how does one get that well one uses
the usual formula for distance in the plane
which is involves the square root of a quadrant
so the distance between these two points we have
to take the difference of these two things and
square it add the difference between these two
things squared and then we have to take the square
root of that okay and you will know by now that
taking a square root is something that we can
talk about but we can't actually do in completion
so these are just approximations to
what we're really having in our minds
okay so these are the approximate side lengths
now what about the area or we prefer to think
about the quadra so i remind you the definition
of the quadra was 16 times the square of the area
and how do you find the area of a quadrilateral
well you use a formula that we talked about last
time which for four points looks like this
okay so this is the area squared times 16.
so the actual area would be this thing
here divided by two so if we square that
we get this thing squared over four we
multiply by 16 we get a four out front
and we can evaluate this by replacing x1 y1 x2 y2
etc by these various values that we've got up here
okay so these various values are also approximate
so necessarily this is also going to be
approximate i'm going to get 18.858 approximately
now what does brahmagupta say brahmagupta says
in the form that we have that this quadra
should be equal to this product the product
of these four factors obtained by taking these
four lengths and taking various combinations
with a minus sign here a minus sign here
a minus sign here and a minus sign here
and so we can do that we can take these four
lengths right here and we can plug them into
here and get our computer to calculate that and
we get 18.857 which is pretty close to 18.858
brown gupta's formula says that this
thing should be equal to this thing
so what has this shown us has it verified for
us that brahmagupta's formula is true well
it's certainly given us some confidence in
brahmagupta's formula because these two things are
not too far apart and we can well
imagine that brahmagupta's formula
might be entirely correct and that the
difference here is just due to the various
round-off errors and the fact that we're not
actually completing these infinite processes
which are underlying these various
operations that would be introduced
but it's also possible that brahmagupta's formula
is not entirely true and that there's some
additional term that really ought to be included
which is so small that it's just not registering
here so it's giving us some confidence but
we cannot actually say that we have verified
brahmagupta's formula exactly in this case we
haven't been able to because we've been using this
real number framework which necessarily introduces
pretty well at every stage some inaccuracies
because we're incapable of actually doing
real number arithmetic we can actually only
do floating point arithmetic our calculators can
only deal with decimal expansions up to a certain
point and then after that they
have to truncate or round off
this is why it's one of the reasons that
you don't see a lot of examples illustrating
geometrical theorems in textbooks because it's
not very convincing if we see a page like this
with all kinds of decimal expansions and floating
point things around and the conclusion at the
end is that this is approximately equal to that
well it doesn't engender the confidence that we
would like pure math students to have and so we
have many many books with many many theoretical
lovely formulas supposedly but a significant lack
of really illustrative examples in many situations
not just elementary geometry this applies even
more so once we get to more advanced mathematics
okay i would like to also exhibit a concrete
example to illustrate robin's formula that's
a much newer formula less familiar and
so it's especially important that we
have a go and see whether it actually works or not
so for ease of demonstration we'll use the same
four points that we've already talked about
a1 a2 a3 a4 but we'll join them up in
a different order to get a non-convex
quadrilateral a1 a2 a4 a3 a1 a2 a4 a3 all right so
well first order business is to calculate the four
lengths of the sides d12 d24 d34 and d13 we
already have d12 we can calculate d24 is 1.1969
d34 we already have is 1.9950 and we can calculate
that d13 this one here is in fact also 1.9950
if you think about the geometry of the
situation the way i've chosen those
four points you may not be surprised
to find that these are the same
and what about the quadria well it's only an
algebraic expression it's given by the same kind
of formula but we have to now cycle through the
points a1 a2 a4 a3 so here's the a1a2 contribution
here's the a2a4 contribution then a4a3 and then
a3a1 so we take this whole thing we square it
multiply by 4 that's the quadra of the non-convex
quadrilateral 16 times the square of the area
and that turns out to be approximately
0.63904 and what does robin's tell us
he tells us that this should be the same as
this product of again combinations of these four
distances here all with plus signs and here with
these two minus signs and here with these two
minus signs and here were these two minus signs so
again we can calculate using these values and we
get 0.63881 and now we compare theoretically these
should be the same they're close but they're not
exactly the same so again can we say that robin's
formula is true well it's approximately true
can we say that we've actually verified
it completely in this one example
no again we cannot say that it's very
hard for us to verify concrete examples
in the context of real number arithmetic
because there are all those untold decimal
expansions out there that we've been
ignoring it's a very problematic business
so we're gonna have to find uh really a better way
of thinking about the essential content of these
two lovely formulas okay so this rather sloppy
real number thinking that we've been adopting in
these examples has led to imprecision and let's
clarify where the imprecision has occurred so
it occurred first of all when we introduced this
transcendental parameterization of the unit circle
so cosine theta and sine theta are generally
only approximately on the unit circle if we
actually calculate these things for some generic
examples of theta we had some confusion over
the definitions of convex and non-convex
we were rather vague about that
of course the square root that appears in the
distance formula introduces approximations this
is a key problem with a very fundamental notion
of distance in euclidean geometry in fact euclid
carefully avoided square roots and carefully
avoided talking about distances exactly because
of this issue so this claim that distance is a
fundamental concept in euclidean geometry is true
only if you regard euclidean geometry as something
different from the geometry of euclid himself
then real number arithmetic is an
impossibility it's only something that we
can talk about not actually do so in practice
all computations are done with floating point
and then we necessarily have truncations and
round off and more errors so a natural question is
is there a better way do we have to do mathematics
this way or is there a step up is there a future
for mathematics where we don't have to do these
kind of games where we can avoid these kinds of
errors and move into a land of complete accuracy
and logical correctness drum roll yes there is of
course there is let me suggest just a few tips or
maybe principles to guide us in a good direction
apart from of course my often repeated statement
that it's really the rational numbers which are at
the heart of mathematics so we have to really
orient ourselves towards the rational numbers
but you've heard me say that many times
already so you already know all of that
but here's some perhaps uh new things that
i haven't stressed that much one is that you
should have confidence in the algebra it will
steer you automatically in a good direction
it's a remarkable and beautiful thing right have
no real explanation for why this is so magically
true but it's pretty well always the case that if
you do the algebra right it will lead you to the
right way of thinking we'll see some examples
second when faced with several alternatives
either think about finding the special
ones or consider them all at the same time
if you have five possibilities and they're all
staring at you a natural question is is one of
these obviously preferable to the others is there
some one of these alternatives that stands out
well if so then we should treat it especially but
if there isn't then we should think about all of
them at the same time we should put them all on
the same footing and accept them as a happy family
third algebra is generally indifferent to order
and position whether b is in between a or c or
c is in between a or b or some point is
in the convex hull of some other points
these are things that algebra has some difficulty
enunciating or to put another way algebra is
largely indifferent to these kinds of issues so
you can expect that working algebraically there
is not going to be a preferred position of three
points in terms of one being inside the other
okay so this is a i think an important thing
to to keep in mind so armed with these insights
we can find the true formulation of
the formulas of brahmagupta and robbins
and that's what i'm going to show you now
all right so very exciting here is the cyclic
quadrilateral quadria theorem so we're going to
attribute this to brahmagupta of course and to
acknowledge robin's contributions and well maybe
i'll give myself a little bit of credit because
as far as i know i'm the first person to have sort
of reorganized the theorem in this form it was
appearing in my book divine proportions as
theorem 112. now it's very possible however that
this form of brahmagupta's formula would
have been known by other people at some point
maybe earlier and so i'm quite happy for someone
to to point out that someone else actually
deserves a credit for this formulation in any case
here it is all right so if a1 a2 a3 a4 is a cyclic
quadrilateral so it's a quadrilateral whose
four points lie on a circle with quadrants is
q i j which is the quadrants between a i and
aj as i and j run through the various indices
one two three and four so these are the
quadrances so these are the quadrances
remind you the quadrants between two points is the
square of the difference between the x coordinates
plus the square of the difference in
y coordinates the purely algebraic
quantity and the quadra a and i remind you that's
16 times the square of the area and it's given
purely in terms of that formula with the x1
y2 minus x2 y1 etc etc all squared times four
okay then here is the relation that the quadri
satisfies a quadratic equation a squared minus two
m a plus p equals zero where m and p are
numbers and they're given by these formulas
m is this quantity q one two plus q two three plus
q three four plus q one four all squared minus
twice the sum q12 squared plus q2 3 squared plus
q34 squared plus q14 squared and p is actually
the quadruple quad function applied to these four
quadrants q12 q23 four and q one four so there's
actually only four of the six coordinates that
appear the quadrants from one to two the quadrants
from two to three from three to four and from
four to one only those four quadrances appear
okay so what you do is you first calculate the
quadruple quad function of these four things and
this is sort of an ingredient in here okay so
when you're calculating this you can calculate
this along the way then you have these numbers m
and p you just write down this quadratic equation
and the quadra of the cyclic quadrilateral
is a solution to this quadratic equation
so in general if you're given these four
quadrances you should expect there to be well
depends on the quadratic equation two solutions
or maybe in some special situations one solution
or maybe in some situations no solution at all
the two solutions correspond to basically
the brahmagupta possibility and the robin's
possibility having a convex quadrilateral with
given quadrances or maybe having a non-convex
quadrilateral both possibilities are
contained in this quadratic equation
and this general principle that if we we have
these two possibilities convex or non-convex
instead of trying to separate them and identify
them both we should think about them together
right and this quadratic equation does that for us
all right so this is a reformulation of the
brahmagupta and robin's formulas but it's
also more than that okay it's more than just
a restatement because it's actually a correct
statement because it's actually a statement that
has ingredients which are all logically defined
we are not relying on a prior theory
of real numbers to understand various
distances or lengths that appear because
there are no distances or lengths in here
so i think one can fairly say
that this is really the first time
that these results have been stated
in a logically correct fashion
that's a very big statement which has
lots of consequences for other things too
we'll see also later on that this
formulation allows us in fact to generalize
these formulas in in many different
directions okay so this is a very good
formulation for a number of different reasons
which we'll talk about in subsequent videos
but so i offer you this theorem as strong
evidence of the utility of thinking
rationally and logically and clearly about
the foundations of mathematics and geometry.